---
layout: post
title: "Ruff linter and formatter"
tags: ["Python", "Ruff", "Linter", "Formatter"]
date: 2026-04-01
---

This is a quick post on [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/), a modern, fast linter and formatter for Python. I've only recently integrated Ruff into my personal workflow and wanted to collect a few notes about basic usage here.

The official documentation includes a [tutorial](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/tutorial/) and a [configuration guide](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/configuration/) that are good starting points. Ruff is both a [linter](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/linter/) (**flagging bugs and bad practices**) and a [formatter](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/formatter/) (**ensuring stylistic consistency**). The boundary between those two functions can be blurred in practice.


## Getting started

One can install Ruff via `pip install ruff`. The configuration is done in the `pyproject.toml` or a dedicated `ruff.toml` file, where a set of linting and formatting rules should be defined. The linter is highly customizable this way, whereas the formatter only supports a small set of configurable settings.

In order to list all relevant issues in the current directory, the Ruff linter can be run with the following command:
```bash
ruff check
```
Running `ruff check --fix` fixes some of the issues automatically. The Ruff formatter immediately starts editing the code when executed:
```bash
ruff format
```
While `ruff format --check` lists the files that would be reformatted, `ruff format --diff` displays the modifications that would be applied.


## Configuration example

For most of my projects, I start with a minimal Ruff config that complements the implicit default setup. It includes a modern standard for line length and a few other personal style preferences. Additional rules can be gradually enabled as needed during the development process.

Here is an excerpt from the `pyproject.toml` file:
```toml
[tool.ruff]
line-length = 120
indent-width = 4

[tool.ruff.lint]
extend-select = ["E501"]  # include line-length violations that would be ignored otherwise (handled by formatter)

[tool.ruff.lint.per-file-ignores]
"__init__.py" = ["F401"]  # ignore unused imports in __init__.py

[tool.ruff.format]
quote-style = "double"
indent-style = "space"
skip-magic-trailing-comma = false  # do not collapse multi-line collections with a trailing comma into a single line
```
